# Identifying Big Data

You may have wondered how to identify whether the given data qualifies as big data. The characteristics of big data, popularly known as ‘the four Vs’, will help you identify big data and differentiate it from normal data. This distinction helps organisations decide whether they need to switch their storage and processing to big data systems.

**VIDEO**

#### Digitisation

Qn: Why has digitisation led to exponential growth in big data? Note: More than one option may be correct.

- The advent of social networking websites, and social interactions among people have increased; which has led to the generation of huge volumes of data.

- Cell phones and other electronic devices are available at much lower prices; thereby leading to an increase in the sales of these devices, which has led to the generation of big data.

- Comfortable and affordable access to wireless internet services such as 3G, 4G, WiFi, etc.

- Increased usage of IoT devices such as — sensors in vehicles, cell phones, laptops, etc.

Ans: All of the above.

- The services provided by social networking websites have allowed its users to generate a lot of content; such as — posts, images, videos, blogs, etc. The user base for a social networking website is in millions; so if a user generates 100 MB data in a day, then 1M users will generate around 95 TB of data on a daily basis; which is a huge amount of data.

- Cell phones and other electronic devices have become much more affordable; and because of this, the sales of these products have increased. Hence, the number of digital users is growing at a rapid pace, and is thereby generating huge volumes of data.

- Today, wireless internet services such as 3G, 4G, WiFi, etc. are readily available. Because of this, users can access the internet on the move, and have uninterrupted access to various data generating services; such as social media networks, etc.

- IoT devices are generating lots of data. Various apps utilise the GPS sensor installed in the cell phone for periodic location tracking of the user. The location can be tracked every hour, every minute, or even every second. Considering the number of cell phone users these days, we can easily guess that the data generated will be massive.

The four Vs of big data include:

- **Volume**: This represents the amount of data generated by a company/organisation. The size of big data typically ranges from petabytes (1000 TBs) to exabytes (10^6 TBs). For example, remember the amount of data generated in an internet minute, which leads to the data explosion. Search engines such as Google, Yahoo, etc. deal with enormous volumes of data.

- **Velocity**: This indicates the rate at which data is generated/consumed. Social media sites such as Twitter, Facebook, etc. generate data from every activity that a user undertakes, leading to an enormous amount of data every minute.

- **Variety**: This represents the different types of data being generated. For example, the different data forms for Gmail may be sign-up/registration data, user login data, inbox emails, sent emails, etc.

- **Veracity**: This represents the quality and accuracy of the data. Previously, veracity was not considered to be a characteristic of big data. But with increasing analyses on generated data, veracity plays an important role.

An organisation relies on the above characteristics to decide whether it has to set up a big data platform or not.

In the next segment, you will learn why conventional systems like SQL is not suitable for handling big data.
